Title: A Splendid Exchange - How Trade Shaped the World
Author: William J. Bernstein

  The middlemen cut out by the act, local smugglers and tea merchants,
were not as happy with the new legislation. When news of its passage
arrived in Boston in September 1773, these two groups took action
against the “unfair foreign competition” from the EIC. Ignoring the
inconvenient fact that the act would save their countrymen a substantial
amount of money, merchants and smugglers couched their arguments in the
familiar protectionist language of national interest. (pg. 242 -- On the
Boston Tea Party)

  Mercantilist theory was simplicity itself: a nation’s wealth was
measured by the amount of gold and silver it possessed.
  In other words, international commerce constituted a zero-sum game in
which one nation’s gain came only at the expense of another, and the
only way for a country to grow rich was to garner gold and silver from
abroad by exporting more than it imported. In modern parlance, the route
to wealth lay in a positive trade balance. (pg. 257)

  Martyn saw clearly that mercantilists, by equating gold with wealth,
repeated the mistake of King Midas. Precious metals are useful only
because they can be exchanged for things we want or need. A nation’s
true wealth, Martyn realized, was defined by how much it consumed: (pg.
258)

  The popular image of an entire Chinese population and its economy
ravaged by opium is a misconception. In the first place, the drug was
quite expensive and largely the province of the mandarin and merchant
elite classes. Second, like alcohol, it was catastrophically addictive
in only a small proportion of its users. (...) One modern scholar
estimates that although as many as half of men and one-fourth of women
were occasional users, in 1879 only about one Chinese person in a
hundred inhaled enough opium to even be at risk of addiction.
  The emperor and the mandarins did express some moral outrage over the
debilitation caused by opium, but they were far more concerned about the
drug’s damage to their balance of trade. China subscribed to
European-style mercantilism as faithfully as any seventeenth-century
Western monarchy. Before 1800, the tea trade was, at least in the terms
of the mercantilist ideology of the day, grossly favorable to the
Chinese. The EIC’s records pinpoint 1806 as the year when the silver
flow reversed. (pg. 289-290)


